[TEP-0091] Update TEP with design evaluations and more examples (#830)
tektoncd/community: teps/0091-trusted-resources.md

Before the verification, the signature is extracted from the resource. For the public key there are several options we can choose by configuration.

In this TEP we propose to store the public keys on the Kubernetes installation. Keys can be configured in a new CRD and deployed to the cluster. This can help to support multiple keys, validate the spec, and have dedicated RBAC policies, so no other components in the cluster can modify the keys.

How does VerificationPolicy work?

You can create multiple `VerificationPolicy` and apply them to the cluster.

> 1. Trusted resources will look up policies from the resource namespace (usually this is the same as taskrun/pipelinerun namespace).

Author: This is always true if we don't change the current code. 
e.g. https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/4ee22f08fd8d93ef2a2fdf93f672f974c18b373b/pkg/reconciler/taskrun/resources/taskref.go#L78

Should I rephrase the words?

> 1. Trusted resources will look up policies from the resource namespace (usually this is the same as taskrun/pipelinerun namespace).

Reviewer: If it's always going to be the case, yes please!

Usually can mean sometimes this doesn't happen - just wanted to confirm.

> 1. Trusted resources will look up policies from the resource namespace (usually this is the same as taskrun/pipelinerun namespace).

Author: sure!

    - pattern: "gcr.io/tekton-releases/catalog/upstream/git-clone"  # bundle resource pattern
    - pattern: " https://artifacthub.io/"  # hub resource pattern
  # authorities defines a list of public keys
  authorities:
    - name: SecretKey
      key:
        # secretRef refers to a secret in the cluster, this secret should contain public keys data
        secretRef:
          name: secret-name-a
          namespace: secret-namespace
        hashAlgorithm: sha256
    - name: InlineKey
      key:
        # data stores the inline public key data
        data: "STRING_ENCODED_PUBLIC_KEY"
```

`namespace` should be the same of corresponding resources' namespace.

`pattern` is used to filter out remote resources by their sources URL. e.g. git resources pattern can be set to https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git. The `pattern` should follow regex schema, we use go regex library's [`Match`](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp#Match) to match the pattern from VerificationPolicy to the `ConfigSource` URL resolved by remote resolution. Note that `.*` will match all resources.
To learn more about regex syntax please refer to [syntax](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp/syntax).

> To learn more about `ConfigSource` please refer to resolvers doc for more context. e.g. [gitresolver](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/git-resolver.md#resolutionrequest-status)

Author: I have talked to @chuangw6 and we don't have a `ConfigSource` in our repo, so I linked to a resolver using `ConfigSource`. I will clarify this in the tep

> To learn more about `ConfigSource` please refer to resolvers doc for more context. e.g. [gitresolver](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/git-resolver.md#resolutionrequest-status)

Reviewer 2: I think it might be worth briefly mentioning what is configsource first, and then where this field came from (i.e. ResolutionRequest status) and what subfield we use. 

https://github.com/tektoncd/chains/issues/521 has full details about how Chains captures this in provenance, but step 1-3 are pipeline-related work.

> To learn more about `ConfigSource` please refer to resolvers doc for more context. e.g. [gitresolver](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/git-resolver.md#resolutionrequest-status)

Author: I think https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipeline-api.md#configsource-1 might be a good link

    - https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git
    - gcr.io/tekton-releases/catalog/upstream/*
  # authoritiyList defines a list of keys
   authorities:
    - name: key_in_secret
      key:
        # secretRef refers to a secret in the cluster, this secret should contain public keys data
        secretRef:
          name:  tekton-pipelines
          namespace: verification-secrets
        # hashAlgorithm is the algorithm for the public key, by default is "sha256"
        hashAlgorithm: sha256
    - name: key_in_data
        key:
          # data is string format of the public key data. This can be configured by users, or if using the secretRef the data is populated and will be used next time before looking up the secret. This can reduce the api calls.
          data: "STRING_ENCODED_PUBLIC_KEY"
    - name: kms
      key: gcpkms://projects/<project>/locations/<location>/keyRings/<keyring>/cryptoKeys/<key>
```

`namespace` should be the same of corresponding resources' namespace.

> `pattern` is used to filter out remote resources by their sources URL. e.g. git resources pattern can be set to https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git. The `pattern` should follow regex schema, we use go regex library's [`Match`](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp#Match) to match the pattern from VerificationPolicy to the `ConfigSource` URL resolved by remote resolution. Note that `.*` will match all resources.

Reviewer 3: I don't see `pattern` in the example above.
Is filtering possible only for remote resources? What about resources in the cluster?

Author: resources in the cluster are also supported by using clusterresolver. 
https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/cluster-resolver.md#resolutionrequest-status
We can use the configsource to filter

Author: cluster resources verification are also supported if using the local resolver, the only missing part is that is doesn't has source information, so we cannot use a pattern to filter it. In that case users can create one policy to match all cluster resources.

To learn more about regex syntax please refer to [syntax](https://pkg.go.dev/regexp/syntax).

> To learn more about `ConfigSource` please refer to resolvers doc for more context. e.g. [gitresolver](./git-resolver.md)

Reviewer 4: git-resolver.md is in pipelines/docs/ .Please fix the link.

Reviewer 4: /lgtm

Author: sure!

> `key` is used to store the public key, note that secretRef and data cannot be configured at the same time.

Author: thanks!

Example of the Key CRD:
```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: VerificationPolicy
metadata:
  name: verification-policy
  namespace: tekton-pipelines
spec:
  resourceAuthorities:
      # pattern is used to filter out remote resources by their sources URL. e.g. if the resources from https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git, then the pattern should be set to https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git. ".*" will match any resources.

>     - pattern: ".*"

Reviewer 4: Is there an order in which the patterns are applied?
In the above case it would be better if https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git is first checked and then ".*".

Author: Yes `https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog.git`  is first checked. The current method is that if the pattern is empty, we will treat it as `.*`.

}

type VerificationPolicySpec struct {
	// ResourceAuthorities defines the list of ResourceAuthority, where each contains resource pattern and
	// corresponding keys

> 	ResourceAuthorities []ResourceAuthority `json:"resourceAuthorities"`

Reviewer 5: It looks like you have an example yaml with a VerificationPolicy which is still using the previous schema, could that be updated as well? (looking at https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/5714 I noticed the doc example there doesnt match the example in the tep here)

Author: Oh thanks! updated the examples as well!

- Does this proposal contain the bare minimum change needed to solve for the use cases?
- Are there any implicit behaviors in the proposal? Would users expect these implicit behaviors or would they be
surprising? Are there security implications for these implicit behaviors?
-->

This proposal doesn't have any effect if users don't enable it. If enabled, users need to sign the resources and config the public key in cluster to bypass verification, the mutating webhook will be skipped for API resources to avoid the failing verification.

### Flexibility

<!--
https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#flexibility

- Are there dependencies that need to be pulled in for this proposal to work? What support or maintenance would be
required for these dependencies?
- Are we coupling two or more Tekton projects in this proposal (e.g. coupling Pipelines to Chains)?
- Are we coupling Tekton and other projects (e.g. Knative, Sigstore) in this proposal?
- What is the impact of the coupling to operators e.g. maintenance & end-to-end testing?
- Are there opinionated choices being made in this proposal? If so, are they necessary and can users extend it with

> their own choices?

Author: Sure!

> their own choices?

Reviewer 3: Why do we need to install sigstore in dogfooding? Could we use pre-signed resources for testing?

-->

> Dependencies need to be pulled in for this proposal:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Dependencies need to be pulled into tekton pipelines for this proposal:
```

### Flexibility

<!--
https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#flexibility

- Are there dependencies that need to be pulled in for this proposal to work? What support or maintenance would be
required for these dependencies?
- Are we coupling two or more Tekton projects in this proposal (e.g. coupling Pipelines to Chains)?
- Are we coupling Tekton and other projects (e.g. Knative, Sigstore) in this proposal?
- What is the impact of the coupling to operators e.g. maintenance & end-to-end testing?
- Are there opinionated choices being made in this proposal? If so, are they necessary and can users extend it with
their own choices?
-->

Dependencies need to be pulled into tekton pipelines for this proposal:
*	github.com/sigstore/sigstore

We are coupling Tekton and Sigstore in this proposal.

What is the impact of the coupling to operators e.g. maintenance & end-to-end testing?

* Need to install sigstore in dogfooding cluster to sign & verify official resources as part of testing

Are there opinionated choices being made in this proposal? If so, are they necessary and can users extend it with

> We choose to use Sigstore to create signer and verifier, users cannot extend/replace it with other options. But users can use whatever keys supported by Sigstore.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* We choose to use Sigstore to create signer and verifier, users cannot extend/replace it with other options. But users can use whatever keys supported by Sigstore.
```

> * We choose to use Sigstore to create signer and verifier, users cannot extend/replace it with other options. But users can use whatever keys supported by Sigstore.

Reviewer 5: can you explain a bit more about why this required? Is there any Sigstore specific logic or is it just convenient to use the libraries? are there any alternatives?

Author: Sure! The reasons in my mind are:

It is convenient to be used as it supports KMS from major cloud providers, and also has the logic to load 
-  https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore/blob/32b357aca9bcd5f75a67667beb775fa13e2b66b4/pkg/signature/verifier.go#L42
- https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore/tree/main/pkg/signature/kms 

It (sigstore/cosign, sigstore/rekor) is also used in Kubernetes, Tekton to sign releases and maintained by Google, Chainguard etc. 

One alternative would be we implement these functions on our own?
Other alternatives would be use libraries such as https://github.com/hashicorp/vault.

Reviewer 5: So it sounds like what we really want form sigstore is the cloud provider KMS interface 🤔  A couple thoughts/questions:

* does sigstore implement these from scratch, or does it pull in libraries that do this? if it pulls in libraries, we could also pull in the same libraries instead of using sigstore
* it sounds like we're not really so much trying to couple ourselves to sigstore as we are trying to use a library that is part of sigstore? if so, maybe we can be explicit that we are only pulling in that library, and NOT the rest of sigstore (e.g. fulcio, rekor, etc.) and that coupling Tekton to those would require further review
* how much work would it be to implement our own?

Author: - For sure they pulled in cloud providers' libraries. But I think it's not a simple wrapper of  cloud kms. For reference: https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore/tree/main/pkg/signature/kms 
- Yes we're using github.com/sigstore/sigstore now and not using other libraries. In the TEP I have mentioned that we only pull sigstore/sigstore for now
- It depends on how we want to implement them. Like if just copy paste the code then it shouldn't be of much work. (Not sure if this is a good practice)

Besides, in chains we have already pulled sigstore, cosign, and rekor.
https://github.com/tektoncd/chains/blob/b0c9c54930bce7d8288a3c68447fd4cac1b14176/go.mod#L41-L43

Reviewer 3: > Of interest - we just started some work on the Sigstore side to rewrite a Go client([background](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1aZfk1TlzcuaO0uz76M9D26-gAvoZLn0oCAKvkbuhcPM/edit#heading=h.fw3hnltgfsqv), [repo](https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-go)). Happy to work together if there's something pipelines needs!

Thanks @wlynch - I cannot access the google doc, do I need to join a specific group to have access?

Reviewer: Probably need to join https://groups.google.com/g/sigstore-dev 🙂

-->

### Reusability

<!--
https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#reusability

- Are there existing features related to the proposed features? Were the existing features reused?
- Is the problem being solved an authoring-time or runtime-concern? Is the proposed feature at the appropriate level
authoring or runtime?
-->

There are no existing features in Tekton which can be reused.

This problem is runtime-concern and the proposed feature is at runtime level.

### Simplicity

<!--
https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#simplicity

- How does this proposal affect the user experience?
- What’s the current user experience without the feature and how challenging is it?
- What will be the user experience with the feature? How would it have changed?
- Does this proposal contain the bare minimum change needed to solve for the use cases?
- Are there any implicit behaviors in the proposal? Would users expect these implicit behaviors or would they be
surprising? Are there security implications for these implicit behaviors?
-->

> This proposal doesn't have any effect if users don't enable it. If enabled, users need to sign the resources and config the public key in cluster to bypass verification, the mutating webhook will be skipped for API resources to avoid the failing verification.

Reviewer: nit: Shouldn't the webhook be removed in either case? It would be weird if different requests were produced depending on whether this is enabled, since this is more around enforcement.

Reviewer: My guess is this will probably be wanted sooner rather than later, since it's much easier for maintenance to have both paths have the same logic rather than have to have different assumptions depending on whether the mutating webhook ran or not.

To support verification you're already going to make sure similar defaulting behavior happens in the reconciler anyway, and there shouldn't be a harm in doing this post-mutating webhook for non-verified objects since they should produce the same result. If defaulting is happening at reconcile for all requests and we're allowing certain requests (i.e. verified resources) to skip the mutating webhook, then the mutating webhook isn't adding value and can just be removed since even non-verified resources should be able to safely skip the webhook as well.

This doesn't change this design, just more-so an FYI to other projects that this will be happening since this will change the stored API object for created objects which may be considered a backwards incompatible change - though I suspect most other tools are agnostic to the defaulting that the webhook is doing and won't even notice it's gone. If we need to follow the deprecation policy strictly here I'd rather do it sooner than later, since the main reason I can see keeping the webhook around is for backwards-compatibility.

Author: Ok got it!
